Aviation safety in Canada
From: Transport Canada


 

Canada’s skies are busy. Millions of flights and more than 150 million passengers travel our 15 million square kilometres of airspace every year.

Transport Canada’s Aviation Safety Program
We work with industry and government partners to help keep planes, people and airports safe and secure. We develop and implement policies, regulations and administer the Canadian Aviation Regulations (CARs).

We set the standards for aircraft designed and used in Canada to ensure all meet certification requirements and operational airworthiness. We also oversee the licensing and training of pilots, crew members and aircraft maintenance engineers.

The work we do is not only applicable to commercial air carriers and those who work in the industry but also for other aircraft such as drones, hot air balloons, gliders and helicopters. Given there are over 34, 000 privately licensed pilots, recreational aviation is a big part of Canadian aviation.

In addition to our regulatory approach for improving safety, we also rely on promotional and educational tools to promote adherence to safety regulations and best practices within the aviation industry and to build awareness of safety hazards and risks.

As aviation is a global industry, connecting people, goods, and communities around the world, it is vital that our work extends outside of Canada so that people can have confidence in the safety of the aviation system around the world. Canada is working with international partners and key stakeholders to enhance the level of safety and security for commercial airlines travelling in or near conflict zones.

Our work behind the scenes

Airport
We make and enforce regulations to:

keep take-off and landing zones free of obstacle
require runways, taxiways and airport lighting to be built to appropriate standards
Drones
We regulate the use of unmanned vehicles.

Wildlife
We help minimize the risks of wildlife hits.

Hangar
We:

make sure Approved Maintenance Organizations meet our regulations for performing maintenance on registered aircraft
issue Aircraft Maintenance Engineer licenses
set aircraft manufacturing and maintenance requirements
Airspace
We regulate 15 million square kilometres of airspace.

Control tower
We make sure that air traffic control activities meet our safety regulations.

Air carriers
We verify that the aviation industry complies with the regulations through oversight activities.

Flight deck
We:

set training standards
certify and monitor training schools and their programs
administer yearly examinations
set medical standards and procedures
Pilot
We:

review pilots’ physical and mental fitness
set flight and duty time requirements
Aircraft certification
We:

establish and regulate standards for Canadian aeronautical products
guide the industry through the certification process
ensure aircraft designs meet internationally accepted design standards
support the industry to take corrective action
Cabin safety
We regulate training standards for emergency procedures, evacuation and training.

We set and enforce safety rules and procedures from pre-flight briefings to the use of seatbelts and personal electronic devices. 

We monitor cabin safety practices and review and approve safety features cards and passenger briefings.

Inspections
We:

train and delegate inspectors who promote safety and conduct over 10,000 oversight and certifications activities per month to verify that operators are following the rules
conduct inspections of all registered and certified aerodromes, airports and heliports
monitor industry for compliance with aviation safety rules and standards, and the effectiveness of a company’s Safety Management System
when necessary, our inspectors issue fines and suspensions

