COVID-19: Symptoms, treatment, what to do if you feel sick
Current situation
Symptoms and treatment
Prevention and risks
Canada's response
Guidance documents
Join the effort to limit the spread of COVID-19

On this page
COVID-19 symptoms
If you have severe symptoms
What to do if you’re sick or were exposed
Caring for others
Treating COVID-19
Long-term symptoms
COVID-19 symptoms
Symptoms of COVID-19 can vary:

from person to person
in different age groups
depending on the COVID-19 variant
Some of the more commonly reported symptoms include:

sore throat
runny nose
sneezing
new or worsening cough
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
temperature equal to or more than 38°C
feeling feverish
chills
fatigue or weakness
muscle or body aches
new loss of smell or taste
headache
abdominal pain, diarrhea and vomiting
feeling very unwell
If you don’t feel well or if you have any symptoms, even if mild, assume you may have COVID-19. Immediately isolate at home and away from others. Check with your local public health authority for more advice, including where and how to get tested if recommended.

You may be infected but not have symptoms. However, you can still spread the virus to others. You may:

develop symptoms later (be pre-symptomatic)
never develop symptoms (be asymptomatic)
If you’ve been in contact with someone who has COVID-19, contact your local public health authority for advice on what to do next.

Learn more about:

Testing for COVID-19: When to get tested and testing results
COVID-19: Contact your local public health authority
Start of symptoms
You may start experiencing symptoms anywhere from 1 to 14 days after exposure. Typically, symptoms appear between 3 and 7 days after exposure.  

Vaccination prevents severe illness
Vaccination is one of the most effective ways to protect our families, communities and ourselves against COVID-19. Evidence indicates that the vaccines used in Canada are very effective at preventing severe illness, hospitalization and death from COVID-19.

However, vaccines are not 100% effective and you may still become infected with or without symptoms.

Learn more about:

Vaccines for COVID-19: How to get vaccinated
Public health measures
When layered together, public health measures are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19, including variants of concern.

Regardless of your vaccination status, you should continue to:

follow the advice of your local public health authority
layer multiple individual public health measures to protect yourself and others
Learn more about:

COVID-19: Provincial and territorial resources
COVID-19: Individual public health measures
If you have severe symptoms
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you develop severe symptoms, such as:

trouble breathing or severe shortness of breath
persistent pressure or pain in the chest
new onset of confusion
difficulty waking up or staying awake
pale, grey or blue-coloured skin, lips or nail beds
Follow instructions for safe transport if taking an ambulance or a private vehicle to a hospital or clinic.

What to do if you’re sick or were exposed
It’s important that you continue to follow the recommendations and restrictions of your local public health authority on quarantine or isolation if you:

may have COVID-19 (for example, you feel sick or have been exposed)
have tested positive for COVID-19
If you have to quarantine or isolate, follow appropriate precautions to reduce the risk of illness spreading within your home. If you don’t have somewhere safe to isolate, contact your local public health authority for available options.

Adults and children with mild COVID-19 symptoms can stay at home while recovering. You don’t need to go to the hospital if symptoms are mild.

Check with your local public health authority about quarantine or isolation periods, and reporting.

Choose your local public health authority:
Alberta
Learn more about:

Testing for COVID-19: When to get tested and testing results
Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites Program
Caring for others
You may be caring for someone at home who has or may have COVID-19. If so, you should follow the appropriate precautions to reduce the risk of illness spreading within your home.

Adults and children with mild COVID-19 symptoms can stay at home while recovering. You don’t need to go to the hospital if symptoms are mild.

Learn more about:

COVID-19: What to do if you or someone in your home is sick
Treating COVID-19
If you’re concerned about your symptoms, consult your health care provider. They may recommend steps or medications you can take to relieve some of your symptoms, like fever and cough.

Follow the advice of your health care provider, who may prescribe treatments.

Learn more about:

COVID-19 treatments
Long-term symptoms
Some people who become infected with COVID-19 may experience long-term symptoms, even after they recover from their initial infection. This is sometimes called post COVID-19 condition or long COVID. It has also been called post-acute COVID-19 syndrome (PACS) or long haul COVID.

Studies are underway to further understand what causes post COVID-19 condition and how to diagnose and treat it.

If you think you have this condition, talk to your health care provider about how to manage your symptoms.

Learn more about:

Post COVID-19 condition (long COVID)
Related links
Digital factsheets, printable posters and shareable videos on COVID-19 (multilingual products available)
COVID-19: Social media and promotional resources for Health Canada and Public Health Agency of Canada