Personal income tax

Get ready to do your taxes

Chat with Charlie
Open chat
Find out what's new for the 2022 tax season and your filing and payment due dates. Begin by gathering your documents to report income and claim deductions, and choose how you want to file and send your completed tax return to the CRA.

Understand your rights as a taxpayer and who should file a tax return.

Steps to get ready for 2022 taxes
Find out what's new
What's new for 2022 taxes
Changes to benefits, credits, and expenses for individuals and families, and updates to the 2022 income tax package.

How COVID-19 benefits impact your taxes
Reporting COVID-19 benefit amounts on your tax return, tax slip issues, and payment options.

Be aware of key dates for 2022 taxes
Filing and payment due dates for taxes, instalment payments, and any amounts you may owe

Filing dates for 2022 taxes
February 20, 2023: Earliest day to file your taxes online
April 30, 2023 (May 1, 2023 since April 30 is a Sunday): Deadline to file your taxes
June 15, 2023: Deadline to file your taxes if you or your spouse or common-law partner are self-employed
Payment date for 2022 taxes
April 30, 2023 (May 1, 2023 since April 30 is a Sunday): Deadline to pay your taxes
Know what to report and claim
Report your income
What to report as income, including COVID-19 benefits, self-employment income, foreign investment income, income from assets, or other earnings.

Claim deductions, credits, and expenses
Find and claim tax deductions and credits, and get information on tax instalments and expenses.

If you are a small business owner or self-employed
Get free tax help to better understand your tax obligations by booking a virtual visit with a Liaison Officer

Get your tax slips
Understand your tax slips such as the T4 and T4A, when you will receive them, and how to get copies

Keep your CRA information up-to-date
Update your CRA information
Change your address, marital status, name, or other personal information with the CRA. Register for direct deposit and keep it up-to-date to get your payments and refunds faster.

Ways to do your taxes
You can file your taxes online or by paper, or find other options such as having someone else complete them for you. Options include:

NETFILE-certified tax software (electronic filing)
Through a tax preparer using EFILE-certified tax software (electronic filing)
Community volunteer tax clinic
Paper tax return
File my Return - Automated phone line (by invitation only)
Send us your completed tax return
File your tax return online or mail your completed tax return to your tax centre.

Make a payment or wait for your refund
Have a balance owing
Pay the taxes you owe, arrange to pay over time, or see options if you cannot pay.

Getting a refund
You will get a refund if you paid more taxes than needed

After you file your tax return
Get your notice of assessment, find out the status of your refund, or make a change to your tax return

If you need more information, you can get answers to frequently asked questions about filing your taxes.